part3/README.md, before:

*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [Part 4](/part4/README.md)
***

# Part 3

## Introduction to Node-RED - 10 min
- practical [**Node-RED Setup**](/part3/NODERED.md)

## Receive ESP8266 Environmental Sensor Data in Node-RED -10 min
- practical [**ESP8266 Environmental Sensor Data**](/part3/DHTDATA.md)

## Node-RED Dashboard - Real Time Chart - 15 min
- practical [**Plot DHT Sensor Data**](/part3/DASHBOARD.md)

## Store data in Cloudant storage - 10 min
- practical [**Write Sensor Data to Cloud Storage**](/part3/CLOUDANT.md)

## Node-RED Dashboard - Historical Playback Chart -10 min
- practical [**Read Cloud Storage and Plot History Chart**](/part3/HISTORY.md)

## Control your ESP8266 reporting interval via a Node-RED Dashboard Form - 20 min
- practical [**Change the Sensor Reporting Interval Dynamically**](/part3/INTERVAL.md)

## Control your LED via Device Commands - 20 min
- practical [**Control the LED Alert colors from the Cloud**](/part3/LED.md)

***
*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [Part 4](/part4/README.md)

Commit message:

Added device simulator instructions to workshop

part3/README.md, after:

*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [Part 4](/part4/README.md)
***

# Part 3

## Introduction to Node-RED - 10 min

Note:  All but the last section in this part of the workshop can be completed without a real device using the Watson IoT Platform device simulator.  Instructions on how to use the simulator are included in this project [here](../Simulator/README.md)

- practical [**Node-RED Setup**](/part3/NODERED.md)

## Receive ESP8266 Environmental Sensor Data in Node-RED -10 min

- practical [**ESP8266 Environmental Sensor Data**](/part3/DHTDATA.md)

## Node-RED Dashboard - Real Time Chart - 15 min

- practical [**Plot DHT Sensor Data**](/part3/DASHBOARD.md)

## Store data in Cloudant storage - 10 min

- practical [**Write Sensor Data to Cloud Storage**](/part3/CLOUDANT.md)

## Node-RED Dashboard - Historical Playback Chart -10 min

- practical [**Read Cloud Storage and Plot History Chart**](/part3/HISTORY.md)

## Control your ESP8266 reporting interval via a Node-RED Dashboard Form - 20 min

- practical [**Change the Sensor Reporting Interval Dynamically**](/part3/INTERVAL.md)

## Control your LED via Device Commands - 20 min

- practical [**Control the LED Alert colors from the Cloud**](/part3/LED.md)

***
*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [Part 4](/part4/README.md)
