part4/STUDIO.md, before:

*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [**Part 4**](/part4/README.md)
***
**Part 4** - [**Watson Studio**](/part4/STUDIO.md) - [Notebooks](/part4/JUPYTER.md)
***

# Watson Studio Set up and Configuration in IBM Cloud

## Lab Objectives

In this lab you will set up Watson Studio with a new Project.  You will learn:

- Watson Studio
- How to set up a new Watson Studio Project
- How to create a Jupyter Notebook

### Introduction
Watson Studio accelerates the machine and deep learning workflows required to infuse AI into your business to drive innovation. It provides a suite of tools for data scientists, application developers and subject matter experts, allowing them to collaboratively connect to data, wrangle that data and use it to build, train and deploy models at scale. Successful AI projects require a combination of algorithms + data + team, and a very powerful compute infrastructure.

- Learn more from the Experts - [Introducing IBM Watson Studio](https://medium.com/ibm-watson/introducing-ibm-watson-studio-e93638f0bb47)

### Step 1 - Watson Studio
- Watch the [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OiaIg8Y0R9k) which illustrates how to set up Watson Studio or follow the steps below.
- Visit Watson Studio at http://dataplatform.ibm.com
- Login with your IBM Cloud account
- In the **Select Organization and Space** dialog, click on **Continue**
- Click on **Get Started**
- Walk through the introductory tutorial to learn about Watson Studio

![Watson Studio Welcome screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-Welcome.png)

### Step 2 - Create a New Project
- Projects are your workspace to organize your resources, such as assets like data, collaborators, and analytic tools like notebooks and models
- Click on **New project**
- Make sure to enable **Jupyter Notebooks**
- Press the **OK** button.
![Watson Studio New project screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-NewProject.png)
- Give your Project a name - **ESP8266**
- Press the **Create** button.
- Press the Settings tab.
- We need to add an Apache Spark service to the project.
- Make certain that Jupyter Notebooks is checked.
- Scroll down to the **Associated services** section and click on the **Add Service**
- Select **Spark** from the dropdown
- In the **Apache Spark** service panel, select the **Lite** plan and press the **Create** button.  Press the **Confirm** button.
- Now an Apache Spark service has been added to your Project.
- We will get started with Tools

### Step 3 - Create a Notebook

- From the top menu, select **Tools**, and then **Notebook**
- Select **From URL**
- Give the notebook a name: **ESP8266 DHT IoT Sensor Analytics**
- Select **From URL**
- Import the notebook from this URL
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/binnes/esp8266Workshop/master/part4/notebooks/ESP8266-DHT-IoT-Sensor-Analytics.ipynb
- Scoll down to the **Select runtime** dropdown and choose your **Spark** service
![Watson Studio New notebook screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-NewNotebook.png)
- Click on **Create Notebook**
![Watson Studio New notebook screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-NewNotebook-install.png)
- Before running this notebook, an additional connector notebook needs to be installed.

## Step 4 - Create an Apache Bahir Connector Notebook
This will install the Apache Bahir connector within your Project/Apache Spark service. If you restart the kernel or start a new notebook in the same project you can use Apache Bahir for connecting to the Cloudant/Apache CouchDB service.

- From the top menu, select **Tools**, and then **Notebook**
- Select **From URL**
- Give the notebook a name: **Apache Bahir**
- Import the notebook from this URL
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/romeokienzler/developerWorks/master/coursera/bahir_setup.ipynb
- Scoll down to the **Select runtime** dropdown and choose **DSX-Spark**
- Click on **Create Notebook**
- Once it loads, click on the **> Run** button twice.
  ![Watson Studio Apache Bahir notebook run screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-Notebook-ApacheBahir.png)

You are now ready to analyze the ESP8266 IoT historical dataset using a Jupyter notebook and Spark.

***
**Part 4** - [**Watson Studio**](/part4/STUDIO.md) - [Notebooks](/part4/JUPYTER.md)
***
*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [**Part 4**](/part4/README.md)

Commit message:

Watson Studio new UX and Instructions

part4/STUDIO.md, after:

*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [**Part 4**](/part4/README.md)
***
**Part 4** - [**Watson Studio**](/part4/STUDIO.md) - [Notebooks](/part4/JUPYTER.md)
***

# Watson Studio Set up and Configuration in IBM Cloud

## Lab Objectives

In this lab you will set up Watson Studio with a new Project.  You will learn:

- Watson Studio
- How to set up a new Watson Studio Project
- How to create a Jupyter Notebook

### Introduction
Watson Studio accelerates the machine and deep learning workflows required to infuse AI into your business to drive innovation. It provides a suite of tools for data scientists, application developers and subject matter experts, allowing them to collaboratively connect to data, wrangle that data and use it to build, train and deploy models at scale. Successful AI projects require a combination of algorithms + data + team, and a very powerful compute infrastructure.

- Learn more from the Experts - [Introducing IBM Watson Studio](https://medium.com/ibm-watson/introducing-ibm-watson-studio-e93638f0bb47)

### Step 1 - Watson Studio
- Watch the [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OiaIg8Y0R9k) which illustrates how to set up Watson Studio or follow the steps below.
- Visit Watson Studio at http://dataplatform.ibm.com
- Login with your IBM Cloud account
- In the **Select Organization and Space** dialog, click on **Continue**
- Click on **Get Started**
- Walk through the introductory tutorial to learn about Watson Studio

![Watson Studio Welcome screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-Welcome.png)

### Step 2 - Create a New Project
- Projects are your workspace to organize your resources, such as assets like data, collaborators, and analytic tools like notebooks and models
#### Create a New Project
- Click on **New project**
- Select the **Complete** tile and press the **OK** button.
![Watson Studio New project screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-NewProject-Tiles.png)
- Give your Project a name : **IoT Sensor Analytics**
- The Cloud Object Storage instance created in Step 1 should be prefilled.
- Press the **Create** button.
![Watson Studio New project screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-NewProject.png)

#### Add an Apache Spark Service
- We need to add an Apache Spark service to the project.
- Press the **Settings** tab.
![Watson Studio Project Settings screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-ProjectSettings.png)
- Scroll down to the **Associated services** section and click on the **Add service** dropdown
- Select **Spark** from the dropdown
![Watson Studio Project Add Spark Service screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-Project-AddSparkService.png)
- In the **Apache Spark** service panel, select the **Lite** plan and press the **Create** button.  Press the **Confirm** button.
![Watson Studio Project Settings screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-Apache-Spark-Service.png)
- Now an Apache Spark service has been added to your Project.

### Step 3 - Create a Notebook

- From the top menu, select **Tools**, and then **Notebook**
- Select **From URL**
- Give the notebook a name : **IoT Sensor Analytics**
- Select **From URL**
- Import the notebook from this URL
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/binnes/esp8266Workshop/master/part4/notebooks/ESP8266-DHT-IoT-Sensor-Analytics.ipynb
- Scoll down to the **Select runtime** dropdown and choose your **Spark** runtime
![Watson Studio New notebook screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-NewNotebook.png)
- Click on **Create Notebook**
![Watson Studio New notebook screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-NewNotebook-install.png)
- Before running this notebook, an additional connector notebook needs to be installed.

## Step 4 - Create an Apache Bahir Connector Notebook
This will install the Apache Bahir connector within your Project/Apache Spark service. If you restart the kernel or start a new notebook in the same project you can use Apache Bahir for connecting to the Cloudant/Apache CouchDB service.

- From the top menu, select **Tools**, and then **Notebook**
- Select **From URL**
- Give the notebook a name: **Apache Bahir**
- Import the notebook from this URL
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/romeokienzler/developerWorks/master/coursera/bahir_setup.ipynb
- Scoll down to the **Select runtime** dropdown and choose your **Spark** runtime
- Click on **Create Notebook**
- Once it loads, click on the **> Run** menu button twice.
- Once it reloads, click on the **Kernel** menu and select **Restart & Run All** button.
  ![Watson Studio Apache Bahir notebook run screenshot](screenshots/WatsonStudio-Notebook-ApacheBahir.png)

You are now ready to analyze the IoT sensor historical dataset using a Jupyter notebook and Spark.

***
**Part 4** - [**Watson Studio**](/part4/STUDIO.md) - [Notebooks](/part4/JUPYTER.md)
***
*Quick links :*
[Home](/README.md) - [Part 1](/part1/README.md) - [Part 2](/part2/README.md) - [Part 3](/part3/README.md) - [**Part 4**](/part4/README.md)
