docs/part3/DASHBOARD.md, before:

# Node-RED Dashboard Charts - Plot Environmental Sensor Data

## Lab Objectives

In this lab you will import Node-RED flows which create Dashboard Charts. After learning about Node-RED Dashboard Charts, you will be able to display temperature and humidity graphs of the Device environmental sensors.  You will learn:

- How to create a Node-RED Dashboard
- Experiment with Chart types
- Plot Real Time sensor data
- Trigger alerts when the real-time sensor data exceeds a threshold value

## Introduction

In this section you will learn about Node-RED Dashboard Charts and then create a chart to graph the sensor data arriving from the device.

### Step 1 - Import the Node-RED Dashboard Chart Flows

Open the “Get the Code” github URL listed below, mark or Ctrl-A to select all of the text, and copy the text for the flow to your Clipboard. Recall from a previous section, click on the Node-RED Menu, then Import, then Clipboard. Paste the text of the flow into the Import nodes dialog and press the red Import button. Finally, click on the red **Deploy** button in the upper right corner.

Node-RED Dashboard Charts : [Get the Code](https://binnes.github.io/esp8266Workshop/part3/flows/NRD-Charts-DHTSensorData.json){target=_blank}

### Step 2 - Learn about various Node-RED Dashboard Chart types

- You might have noticed that the flow import in the prior step actually created three tabs.  These are called Node-RED flows.
- The **Chart Intro** flow introduces you to the various Node-RED Dashboard Chart types that are available.  You can create Line charts, various Pie chart styles – Pie, Donut, Polar Area, Radar - and vertical and horizontal Bar charts.
 ![Node-RED Chart Intro](screenshots/Node-RED-ChartIntro-flow.png)
- For illustration, the **Fill Single Chart Array** function node above fills an array of static sample data and sends the data to the **Chart** node to visualize.

![Line chart array](screenshots/NRD-Charts-Intro-Flow-LineChartArray.png)

- The Node-RED flow is not nearly as interesting as the charts that it renders.  To launch the Node-RED Dashboard, in the Node-RED sidebar, turn to the **dashboard** tab and click on the **Launch** button (1) [See two pictures above].
 ![Node-RED Chart Intro](screenshots/Node-RED-ChartIntro-dashboard.png)

### Step 3 – Generating and Displaying data in Node-RED Dashboards

The next Node-RED flow - **Dashboard Intro** - uses a variety of UI widgets to display data in the Node-RED Dashboard.  There is a Switch node that turns On/Off a random number generator function node.  The simple random numbers are sent to a line Chart node, a Gauge node, a Slider node, a Text node and, if the number exceeds a threshold, will display an alert notification message.

 ![Node-RED Dashboard Intro](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-Intro-flow.png)

- Turn to the Node-RED Dashboard browser tab that you launched in Step 2, click on the menu tab (2) in the upper left corner, and select the Introduction tab.
- On the Introduction dashboard, turn on the **Switch** (3) to start the data visualization.
- Experiment with / observe the Dashboard controls.
 ![Node-RED Dashboard Intro dashboard](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-Intro.png)

### Step 4 - Plot Device Environmental Sensor Data

Now that you have learned about Node-RED Dashboard and Chart types, you are ready to plot the real-time device environmental sensor data.  If you are working in the lite plan on the IBM Cloud memory is limited, so you may want to delete the tabs Chart Intro and Dashboard Intro by double clicking each tab to open up the tab configuration sidebar, where you will find a delete button.

- Turn to the next flow - **Plot DHT Sensor Data**
- The **mqtt in** node may need to be configured to pull in the config you created in the previous section.is already configured to receive *status* Device Events from the ESP8266 Device Type.
- The **Change** nodes extract the ```msg.payload.d.temp``` and ```msg.payload.d.humidity``` values from the JSON object sent over MQTT from the device environmental sensor to Watson IoT Platform.
- The environmental sensor values are sent to two charts to plot Temperature and Humidity.
 ![NRD ESP8266 DHT chart flow](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-DHT-flow.png)
- Turn to the Node-RED Dashboard browser tab that you launched in Step 2, click on the tab in the upper left corner, and select the **ESP8266 Workshop** tab.

![Temperature and Humidity chart](screenshots/NRD-ESP8266-DHT-TempHum-Chart.png)

### Step 5 - Trigger Alerts when Real-Time Sensor Data Exceeds a Threshold Value

Often IoT devices and sensors are deployed so that alerts can be triggered when the real time sensor data exceeds a threshold value.  In this last Step, the flow checks the temperature values and, if the temperature exceeds the threshold, triggers a Node-RED Dashboard notification.

- In the prior step, the flow included three nodes that have not yet been discussed.
- A **Switch** node is configured to *Warn on High Values* by testing if ```msg.payload.d.temp``` is greater than 30C.
- A **Template** node is configured to construct a sentence ```Alert : Critical Value Detected {{payload.d.temp}}```
- The Alert message is sent to a **Node-RED Dashboard Notification** node to display in the browser.
- This flow could be extended to call a **Twilio** node to send a SMS message.  It could raise an alarm in another system by triggering a REST API call to the manufacturing production operations systems.

 ![NRD ESP8266 DHT chart flow](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-DHT-flow2.png)

- Return to the Node-RED Dashboard **ESP8266 Workshop** tab and increase the temperature of your DHT sensor above 30C.

![Temperature and Humidity chart](screenshots/NRD-ESP8266-DHT-TempHum-ChartAlert.png)

Commit message:

added clarity around importing dashboard nodes

docs/part3/DASHBOARD.md, after:

# Node-RED Dashboard Charts - Plot Environmental Sensor Data

## Lab Objectives

In this lab you will import Node-RED flows which create Dashboard Charts. After learning about Node-RED Dashboard Charts, you will be able to display temperature and humidity graphs of the Device environmental sensors.  You will learn:

- How to create a Node-RED Dashboard
- Experiment with Chart types
- Plot Real Time sensor data
- Trigger alerts when the real-time sensor data exceeds a threshold value

## Introduction

In this section you will learn about Node-RED Dashboard Charts and then create a chart to graph the sensor data arriving from the device.

### Step 1 - Add the Dashboard nodes to the Node-RED pallet

Follow the [steps outlined in the introduction to Node-RED](NODERED.md#step-3-how-to-install-additional-node-red-nodes-information-only) to import the **node-red-dashboard** nodes to your Node-RED pallet

- From the Node-RED menu (☰), select *Manage Pallet**
- Goto the Install tab
- Search for the **node-red-dashboard** nodes
- Press the **install** button to install the nodes
- Close the Pallet Manager window when the nodes have been installed

### Step 1 - Import the Node-RED Dashboard Chart Flows

Open the “Get the Code” github URL listed below, mark or Ctrl-A to select all of the text, and copy the text for the flow to your Clipboard. Recall from a previous section, click on the Node-RED Menu, then Import, then Clipboard. Paste the text of the flow into the Import nodes dialog and press the red Import button. Finally, click on the red **Deploy** button in the upper right corner.

Node-RED Dashboard Charts : [Get the Code](https://binnes.github.io/esp8266Workshop/part3/flows/NRD-Charts-DHTSensorData.json){target=_blank}

### Step 2 - Learn about various Node-RED Dashboard Chart types

- You might have noticed that the flow import in the prior step actually created three tabs.  These are called Node-RED flows.
- The **Chart Intro** flow introduces you to the various Node-RED Dashboard Chart types that are available.  You can create Line charts, various Pie chart styles – Pie, Donut, Polar Area, Radar - and vertical and horizontal Bar charts.
 ![Node-RED Chart Intro](screenshots/Node-RED-ChartIntro-flow.png)
- For illustration, the **Fill Single Chart Array** function node above fills an array of static sample data and sends the data to the **Chart** node to visualize.

![Line chart array](screenshots/NRD-Charts-Intro-Flow-LineChartArray.png)

- The Node-RED flow is not nearly as interesting as the charts that it renders.  To launch the Node-RED Dashboard, in the Node-RED sidebar, turn to the **dashboard** tab and click on the **Launch** button (1) [See two pictures above].
 ![Node-RED Chart Intro](screenshots/Node-RED-ChartIntro-dashboard.png)

### Step 3 – Generating and Displaying data in Node-RED Dashboards

The next Node-RED flow - **Dashboard Intro** - uses a variety of UI widgets to display data in the Node-RED Dashboard.  There is a Switch node that turns On/Off a random number generator function node.  The simple random numbers are sent to a line Chart node, a Gauge node, a Slider node, a Text node and, if the number exceeds a threshold, will display an alert notification message.

 ![Node-RED Dashboard Intro](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-Intro-flow.png)

- Turn to the Node-RED Dashboard browser tab that you launched in Step 2, click on the menu tab (2) in the upper left corner, and select the Introduction tab.
- On the Introduction dashboard, turn on the **Switch** (3) to start the data visualization.
- Experiment with / observe the Dashboard controls.
 ![Node-RED Dashboard Intro dashboard](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-Intro.png)

### Step 4 - Plot Device Environmental Sensor Data

Now that you have learned about Node-RED Dashboard and Chart types, you are ready to plot the real-time device environmental sensor data.  If you are working in the lite plan on the IBM Cloud memory is limited, so you may want to delete the tabs Chart Intro and Dashboard Intro by double clicking each tab to open up the tab configuration sidebar, where you will find a delete button.

- Turn to the next flow - **Plot DHT Sensor Data**
- The **mqtt in** node may need to be configured to pull in the config you created in the previous section.is already configured to receive *status* Device Events from the ESP8266 Device Type.
- The **Change** nodes extract the ```msg.payload.d.temp``` and ```msg.payload.d.humidity``` values from the JSON object sent over MQTT from the device environmental sensor to Watson IoT Platform.
- The environmental sensor values are sent to two charts to plot Temperature and Humidity.
 ![NRD ESP8266 DHT chart flow](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-DHT-flow.png)
- Turn to the Node-RED Dashboard browser tab that you launched in Step 2, click on the tab in the upper left corner, and select the **ESP8266 Workshop** tab.

![Temperature and Humidity chart](screenshots/NRD-ESP8266-DHT-TempHum-Chart.png)

### Step 5 - Trigger Alerts when Real-Time Sensor Data Exceeds a Threshold Value

Often IoT devices and sensors are deployed so that alerts can be triggered when the real time sensor data exceeds a threshold value.  In this last Step, the flow checks the temperature values and, if the temperature exceeds the threshold, triggers a Node-RED Dashboard notification.

- In the prior step, the flow included three nodes that have not yet been discussed.
- A **Switch** node is configured to *Warn on High Values* by testing if ```msg.payload.d.temp``` is greater than 30C.
- A **Template** node is configured to construct a sentence ```Alert : Critical Value Detected {{payload.d.temp}}```
- The Alert message is sent to a **Node-RED Dashboard Notification** node to display in the browser.
- This flow could be extended to call a **Twilio** node to send a SMS message.  It could raise an alarm in another system by triggering a REST API call to the manufacturing production operations systems.

 ![NRD ESP8266 DHT chart flow](screenshots/Node-RED-Dashboard-DHT-flow2.png)

- Return to the Node-RED Dashboard **ESP8266 Workshop** tab and increase the temperature of your DHT sensor above 30C.

![Temperature and Humidity chart](screenshots/NRD-ESP8266-DHT-TempHum-ChartAlert.png)
